feat(doc): add guest configuration to bao-classic config documentation (#78)
bao-project/bao-docs: source/bao_hyp/config.rst

    any changes made to the configuration lists' number of elements is reflected in the respective
    list size.

If you intend to use built-in VM images (that are embedded in the hypervisor), you can
**optionally** declare them using the ``VM_IMAGE`` macro. For details and usage, please refer to
the `VM Image`_ section.

VM Configuration

> --------------------

Reviewer: ```suggestion
VM Configuration
----------------
```

Bao's configuration file allows you to partition the platform’s hardware resources, including CPU
cores, memory regions, devices, and communication channels, across multiple VMs according to your

> needs. In Bao, CPU cores, memory regions, and interrupt are always assigned exclusively to a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
needs. In Bao, CPU cores, memory regions, and interrupts are always assigned exclusively to a
```

Reviewer: You missed this one @Diogo21Costa

Author: You're right, sorry! Fixed in https://github.com/bao-project/bao-docs/pull/78/commits/9b3a4f7a55dec41f30407e088573b4d190286a27.

configuration of each individual VM:

.. code-block:: c

    struct vm_config {
        struct {
          vaddr_t base_addr;
          paddr_t load_addr;
          size_t size;
          bool separately_loaded;
          bool inplace;
        } image;
        vaddr_t entry;
        cpumap_t cpu_affinity;
        colormap_t colors;
        struct vm_platform platform;
    };

Each entry in this list represents a unique VM configuration, defining its image, memory address,
CPU affinity, color mapping, and platform details. For each VM, the following parameters must be
specified:

- ``image`` [mandatory] - a structure containing information about VM image loading (see details
  in `VM Image`_)
- ``entry`` [mandatory] - defines the entry point address in VM's address space;
- ``platform description`` [mandatory] - a description of the VM platform, defining its resource
  assignments and requirements (see details in `Virtual Machine Configuration`_);
- ``cpu_affinity`` [optional] - defines the affinity of the VM's vCPUs to the physical CPUs
  assigned to the virtual platform. The affinity will be followed as best as possible, but it is

>   not guaranteed (see details in `CPU Affinity`_).;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  not guaranteed (see details in `CPU Affinity`_);
```

- ``colors`` [optional] - assignment of shared LLC cache colors (or partitions) to this VM (see
  details in `Coloring`_).

VM Image

> ***********

Reviewer: ```suggestion
VM Image
********
```

    VM_IMAGE(img_name, "/path/to/VM/binary.bin");

The ``VM_IMAGE`` macro has two parameters:

1. The ``img_name``, a unique identifier associated with the image that will later be used to
describe the image running on the VM (see `VM Image`_);

2. A C string with the VM image's binary file path. It can be either an absolute path or a path
relative to the config source file.

The VM ``image`` comprises a structure that describes the image configuration running on the
VM side. It encompasses the following options:

- ``image`` [mandatory] - definition of the ``image`` to run on a given VM. The ``image``
  corresponds to the following structure:

.. code-block:: c

    struct vm_image {
            vaddr_t base_addr;
            paddr_t load_addr;
            size_t size;
            bool separately_loaded;
            bool inplace;
    } image;

where:

- ``base_addr`` [mandatory] - corresponds to the ``image`` load ``guest address``;
- ``load_addr`` [mandatory] - corresponds to the ``image`` load ``physical address``. This value
  can be defined using the macro ``VM_IMAGE_OFFSET(img_name)``;
- ``size`` [mandatory] - corresponds to the image size. For builtin images declared using

>   `VM_IMAGE`, this value can be defined using the macro ``VM_IMAGE_SIZE(img_name)``;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  ``VM_IMAGE``, this value can be defined using the macro ``VM_IMAGE_SIZE(img_name)``;
```

- ``separately_loaded`` [optional] - informs the hypervisor if the VM image is to be loaded

>   separately by a bootloader; By default, separately_loaded is set as false;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  separately by a bootloader. By default, ``separately_loaded`` is set as ``false``;
```

- ``inplace`` [optional]- use the image inplace and don’t copy the image. By default, inplace is

>   set as false;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- ``inplace`` [optional]- use the image inplace and don’t copy the image. By default, ``inplace`` is
  set as ``false``;
```

   is highly recommended, especially for MPU systems, where manual allocation of space for the VM
   image can be challenging if embedded in Bao's binary. Without utilizing ``VM_IMAGE_LOADED``,
   Bao may need to copy the image, potentially resulting in wasted space.

.. note::
  The integration of the appropriate macro, tailored to your specific use case, is crucial for
  ensuring consistency and reliability in your VM setup. **Manual configuration of the**
  ``vm_image`` **struct is discouraged**. Always use the appropriate macro for your deployment
  scenario. This ensures correct alignment, address calculations, and compatibility with different
  Bao versions and hardware platforms.

Moreover, if the ``separately_loaded`` parameter is configured as false, the hypervisor interprets
this setting as the offset of the built-in VM image within its own image, denoted as
``VM_IMAGE_OFFSET``. During run-time, the hypervisor adjusts this value to be subsequently
interpreted as a physical address. This adjustment involves adding the address at which the
hypervisor itself was loaded. However, if the ``separately_loaded`` parameter is configured as

> true, the VM image is not embedded in the hypervisor image; instead, it is loaded independently.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``true``, the VM image is not embedded in the hypervisor image; instead, it is loaded independently.
```

        struct ipc* ipcs;
        size_t dev_num;
        struct vm_dev_region* devs;
        bool mmu;
        struct arch_vm_platform arch;
    }

By customizing this configuration, users can tailor the virtual platform to suit specific workload
requirements and application needs for their virtual machines. The configuration includes the
definition of:

- **Number of CPUs** - see details in `Number of vCPUs`_;
- **Memory regions** - see details in `Memory Regions`_;`
- **Inter-Partition Comunication (IPC)** - see details in `Inter-Partition Communication (IPC)`_;
- **Devices** - see details in `Devices`_;
- **Architectural-Specific Configurations** - see details in `Architectural-Specific
  Configurations`_;

1. Number of vCPUs
##################
.. _Number of vCPUs:

- ``cpu_num`` [mandatory] - defines the number of CPUs assigned to the VM;

.. warning::
  Ensure that the cumulative count of CPUs allocated across all VMs listed in the ``vmlist`` does not
  exceed the total number of available CPUs on the platform. Failing to adhere to this requirement
  might result in the VM failing to boot without any warning.

2. Memory Regions
#################
.. _Memory Regions:

> In Bao’s configuration, you will encounter both ``guest addresses`` and ``physical addresses``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Bao’s configuration, you will encounter both **guest addresses** and **physical addresses**
```

- ``region_num`` [mandatory] - defines the number of memory regions in the VM, specifically, the
  number of ``vm_mem_region`` entries in the ``vm_platform``'s ``regions`` list.

Then, each memory region is described by populating the ``struct vm_mem_region``:

.. code-block:: c

    struct vm_mem_region {
        paddr_t base;
        size_t size;
        bool place_phys;
        paddr_t phys;
    };

where:

- ``base`` [mandatory] - corresponds to the base ``guest address`` of the memory region;
- ``size``  [mandatory] -  corresponds to the size of the memory region;

.. note::
  It is mandatory for ``base`` and ``size`` to align with the smallest page size of the architecture.
  For MMU systems, this typically aligns to 4K, while for MPU systems, it aligns to 64 bytes.

- ``place_phys`` [optional] - the memory region is mapped into the virtual memory, and it's
  important to note that the virtual address (VA) might not necessarily be the same as the physical
  address (PA). When "place_phys" is set to true, the VM address corresponds to the physical
  address. If ``place_phys`` equals to true, it allows to specify the physical address of the

>   memory region. By default, ``place_phys`` equals to false;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  memory region. By default, ``place_phys`` equals to ``false``;
```

> - ``phys`` [mandatory if ``place_phys`` is true] - it corresponds to the physical address where the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- ``phys`` [mandatory if ``place_phys`` is ``true``] - it corresponds to the physical address where the
```

  memory region should be mapped;

.. note::
    - For enhanced performance, especially in MMU-based targets, it's recommended to align ``base``
      and ``size`` to the architecture's huge pages (e.g., 2MiB for Arm and RISC-V). Similarly, if
      ``place_phys`` is enabled, aligning ``phys`` to the architecture's huge pages can also
      improve performance.

>     - In MPU systems, place_phys and phys are ignored.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - In MPU systems, ``place_phys`` and ``phys`` are ignored.
```

  equals to zero;
- ``ipcs`` [mandatory if ``ipc_num`` > 0] - corresponds to the specification of the IPC and is
  configured through the following structure:

.. code-block:: c

    struct ipc {
        paddr_t base;
        size_t size;
        size_t shmem_id;
        size_t interrupt_num;
        irqid_t *interrupts;
    };

where:

- ``base``  [mandatory] - corresponds to the base ``guest address`` of the IPC memory region;
- ``size`` [mandatory] - corresponds to the size of the IPC memory region;

.. note::
  The ``size`` field must be less than or equal to the size of the shared memory. Additionally, for
  MPU systems, the ``base`` field is ignored, as the region address is the same as the shared
  memory object address. Also, it is mandatory for both ``base`` and ``size`` to be aligned with
  the architecture's smallest page size. For MMU systems, this corresponds to 4K in all
  architectures, while for MPU systems, the alignment corresponds to 64 bytes.

- ``shmem_id`` [mandatory] - corresponds to the ID of the shared memory associated with the IPC;
- ``interrupt_num`` [mandatory] - defines the number of interrupts assigned to the IPC;

> - ``interrupts`` [mandatory if *interrupt_num* > 0] - defines a list of interrupt IDs assigned to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- ``interrupts`` [mandatory if ``interrupt_num`` > 0] - defines a list of interrupt IDs assigned to
```

  the IPC - ``(irqid_t[]) {irq_1, ..., irq_n}``;

.. warning::
  Specifying a number of interrupts in the ``interrupts`` buffer that differs from the
  ``interrupt_num`` may result in unforeseen behavior.

4. Devices
##########
.. _Devices:

- ``dev_num`` [mandatory] - corresponds to the number of devices assigned to the VM;
- ``devs`` [mandatory if ``dev_num`` > 0] - corresponds to the specification of the VM's devices
  and is configured through the following structure:

.. code-block:: c

    struct vm_dev_region {
        paddr_t pa;
        vaddr_t va;
        size_t size;
        size_t interrupt_num;
        irqid_t *interrupts;
        streamid_t id; /* bus master id for iommu effects */
    };

where:

- ``pa`` [mandatory] - corresponds to the base ``physical address`` of the device;

> - ``va`` [mandatory] - corresponds to the base VM ``physical address`` of the device;

Reviewer: Physical?

- ``size`` [mandatory] - corresponds to the size of the device memory region;

.. note::
  It is mandatory for ``base`` and ``size`` to align with the smallest page size of the
  architecture. For MMU systems, this typically aligns to 4K, while for MPU systems, it aligns to
  64 bytes. Please note that for MPU systems, the virtual address (``va``) must match the physical
  address (``pa``).

- ``interrupt_num`` [optional] - corresponds to the number of interrupts generated by the device to
  the VM. By default, ``interrupt_num`` equals to 0;

> - ``interrupts`` [mandatory if *interrupt_num*>0] - defines a list of interrupt IDs generated by

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- ``interrupts`` [mandatory if ``interrupt_num``>0] - defines a list of interrupt IDs generated by
```

                paddr_t gicc_addr;
                paddr_t gich_addr;
                paddr_t gicv_addr;
                paddr_t gicd_addr;
                paddr_t gicr_addr;

                irqid_t maintenance_id;
            } gic;

            struct smmu_dscrp {
                paddr_t base;
                streamid_t global_mask;
            } smmu;

            struct clusters {
                size_t num;
                size_t* core_num;
            } clusters;
        };

    Where, for the GIC interrupt controller ``struct gic_dscrp`` description:

    - ``gic.gicc_addr`` [mandatory for GICv2 platforms] - base address for the GIC's CPU Interface;
    - ``gic.gich_addr`` [mandatory for GICv2 platforms] - base address for the GIC's Virtual
      Interface Control Registers;
    - ``gic.gicv_addr`` [mandatory for GICv2 platforms] - base address for the GIC's Virtual CPU
      Interface;
    - ``gic.gicd_addr`` [mandatory] - base address for the GIC's Distributor;
    - ``gic.gicr_addr`` [mandatory for GICv3/4 platforms] - base address for the GIC's
      Redistributor;
    - ``gic.maintenance_id`` [mandatory] - The interrupt ID for the GIC's maintenance interrupt;

>     For the SMMU `struct smmu_dscrp`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    For the SMMU ``struct smmu_dscrp``:
```

...) or none at all. An ID is assigned to each shared memory object. Later, this ID can be linked
to an IPC in the multi-VM configuration.

.. figure:: img/shmem.svg
    :align: center
    :name: shmem-fig

|

The configuration of shared memory is done by populating a struct called ``shmem``. The struct
definition is presented bellow:

.. code-block:: c

    struct shmem {
        size_t size;
        bool place_phys;
        union {
            paddr_t base;
            paddr_t phys;
        };
    };

This struct contains the following parameters:

- ``size`` [mandatory] - defines the total size of the shared memory. The size of the shared \
  memory must always be multiples of 4Kb (0x1000);
- ``place_phys`` [optional] - This flag determines the mapping of shared memory into virtual \
  memory. When ``place_phys`` is set to ``false`` (default value), the base address is a VM \
  (virtual) address. When set to ``true``, the VM address directly corresponds to the physical \
  address (PA) of the shared memory.
- ``base / phys`` [optional] - When ``place_phys`` is set to ``false``, the ``base`` parameter \

>   should be used to specify the VM virtual address of the shared memory. When place_phys is \

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  should be used to specify the VM virtual address of the shared memory. When ``place_phys`` is \
```

2. A C string with the guest image's binary file path. It can be either an absolute path or a path
relative to the config source file.

VM Configuration
--------------------

Bao's configuration file allows you to partition the platforms' hardware resources, such as CPU

> cores, memory, or devices, by assigning them one or more VMs. It also allows you to configure the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
cores, memory, or devices, by assigning them to one or more VMs. It also allows you to configure the
```

guest image to run on that VM. In Bao, resources are exclusively assigned to each VM, including
communication channels between two or more VMs, which may utilize shared memory or dedicated links.

.. figure:: img/guest-config.svg
    :align: center
    :name: guest-config-fig

> Each entry in the ``vmlist`` mentioned earlier is a ``vm_config`` struct, defining the
> configuration for different guests by populating the following struct called *vmconfig*:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each entry in the ``vmlist`` mentioned earlier is a ``vm_config`` struct, which defines the
configuration of each individual guest:
```

Author: Thanks, fixed!

.. code-block:: c

    struct vm_config {
        struct vm_image image;
        vaddr_t entry;
        cpumap_t cpu_affinity;
        colormap_t colors;
        struct vm_platform platform;
    };

Each entry in this list represents a unique VM configuration, defining its image, memory address,
CPU affinity, color mapping, and platform details. For each VM, the following parameters must be
specified:

- **image** [mandatory] - a structure containing information about guest image loading (see details
  in `Guest Image`_)
- **entry** [mandatory] - defines the entry point address in VM's address space;
- **platform description** [mandatory] - a description of the VM platform, defining its resource
  assignments and requirements (see details in `Virtual Machine Configuration`_);
- **cpu_affinity** [optional] - defines the affinity of the VM's vCPUs to the physical CPUs
  assigned to the virtual platform (see details in `CPU Affinity`_);
- **colors** [optional] - assignment of shared LLC cache colors (or partitions) to this VM (see

>   details in `Coloring`_).

Reviewer: Use the inline code format for each code related keyword (struct fields, macros, etc).

Author: Thanks, fixed!

  set as false;

To ensure accurate and efficient configuration of VM images, it is strongly recommended to leverage
the designated macros provided by Bao. These macros, namely ``VM_IMAGE_BUILTIN`` and
``VM_IMAGE_LOADED``, are specifically designed to simplify the image configuration process and
enhance compatibility with the hypervisor.

1. **VM_IMAGE_BUILTIN** - This macro simplifies image configuration by requiring only the
   ``img_name`` and the image ``base_addr``. This macro specifies both the base address and image
   size.

2. **VM_IMAGE_LOADED** - This macro requires additional configurations. It requires the definition
   of image ``base_addr``, the image ``load_addr``, and the image ``size``.

Using these macros not only streamlines the configuration steps but also ensures adherence to the
correct syntax and parameters. Attempting to manually configure image details without utilizing
these macros may result in errors or unintended behavior.

The integration of the appropriate macro tailored to your specific use case, encompassing essential
parameters such as img_name, base_addr, load_addr, and size. This practice not only fosters

> consistency but also enhances reliability in your VM setup. For instance:

Reviewer: The writing here is really intricate and not so clear.

- **IMAGE_BUILTIN**: Simplifies system configuration by leveraging Bao's default knowledge of the
  image location. No separate configuration or loading of guest images through a bootloader is
  required, and adjustments to the size of guest images are unnecessary.

- **IMAGE_LOADED**: Highly recommended, especially for MPU systems, where manual allocation of space
  for the guest image can be challenging if embedded in Bao's binary. Without utilizing LOADED, Bao
  may need to copy the image, potentially resulting in space wastage

Moreover, if the ``separately_loaded`` parameter is configured as false, the hypervisor interprets
this setting as the offset of the built-in guest image within its own image, denoted as
``VM_IMAGE_OFFSET``. During run-time, the hypervisor adjusts this value to be subsequently
interpreted as a physical address. This adjustment involves adding the address at which the
hypervisor itself was loaded. However, if the ``separately_loaded`` parameter is configured as
true, the guest image is not embedded in the hypervisor image; instead, it is loaded independently.
For more details, refer to the figure below.

> .. figure:: img/guest-image.svg
>     :align: center
>     :name: vm-image-fig

Reviewer: To make the scale to the width of the window or the image seems to small.
```suggestion
.. figure:: img/guest-image.svg
    :align: center
    :width: 100%
    :name: vm-image-fig
```

Author: Thanks, fixed!

Virtual Machine Configuration
*****************************

The VM configuration enables users to define the characteristics of each virtualized platform. It
encompasses critical details that define the VM's run-time environment, performance, and overall

> capabilities. The virtual machine configuration is performed by populating the structure `struct
> vm_platform`, outlined below:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
capabilities. The virtual machine configuration is performed by populating the structure ``struct
vm_platform``, outlined below:
```

Author: Thanks, fixed!

.. code-block:: c

    struct vm_platform {
        size_t cpu_num;
        size_t region_num;
        struct vm_mem_region* regions;
        size_t ipc_num;
        struct ipc* ipcs;
        size_t dev_num;
        struct vm_dev_region* devs;
        bool mmu;
        struct arch_vm_platform arch;
    }

By customizing this configuration, users can tailor the virtual platform to suit specific workload

> requirements and application needs for their virtual machines. The configuration encompasses the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
requirements and application needs for their virtual machines. The configuration includes the
```

Author: Thanks, fixed!

definition of:

- **Number of CPUs** - see details in `Number of vCPUs`_;
- **Memory regions** - see details in `Memory Regions`_;`
- **Inter-Process Comunication (IPC)** - see details in `Inter-Process Communication (IPC)`_;
- **Devices** - see details in `Devices`_;
- **Memory Management** - see details in `Memory Management`_;
- **Architectural-Specific Configurations** - see details in `Architectural-Specific
  Configurations`_;

1. Number of vCPUs
##################
.. _Number of vCPUs:

> - **cpu_num** [mandatory] - defines the number of CPUs assigned to the VM;

Reviewer: Use inline format for the field name. Normalize on the overall document.

Author: Thanks, fixed!

.. warning::
  Ensure that the cumulative count of CPUs allocated across all VMs listed in the `vmlist` does not
  exceed the total number of available CPUs on the platform. Failing to adhere to this requirement
  might result in the guest failing to boot without any warning.

2. Memory Regions
#################
.. _Memory Regions:

Bao employs a two-stage translation mechanism to manage VM memory. Each VM memory region is
delineated by its virtual address in the second stage. Generally, Bao manages the allocation of
physical memory for these regions. However, there is an option to define the physical memory region
where the specific region will be mapped.

> For each VM, users can define multiple memory regions. To facilitate this, users first define the
> total number of memory regions via the `region_num` parameter:
> 
> - **region_num** [mandatory] - defines the number of memory regions in the VM, specifically, the
>   number of `vm_mem_region` entries in the `vm_platform`'s `regions` list.
> 
> Then, each memory region is described by populating the `struct vm_mem_region`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For each VM, users can define multiple memory regions. To facilitate this, users first define the
total number of memory regions via the ``region_num`` parameter:

- ``region_num`` [mandatory] - defines the number of memory regions in the VM, specifically, the
  number of ``vm_mem_region`` entries in the ``vm_platform``'s ``regions`` list.

Then, each memory region is described by populating the ``struct vm_mem_region``:
```

Author: Thanks, fixed!

.. code-block:: c

    struct vm_mem_region {
        paddr_t base;
        size_t size;
        bool place_phys;
        paddr_t phys;
    };

where:

- **base** [mandatory] - corresponds to the base virtual address of the memory region;
- **size**  [mandatory] -  corresponds to the size of the memory region;

.. note::
  It is mandatory for `base` and `size` to align with the smallest page size of the architecture.
  For MMU systems, this typically aligns to 4K, while for MPU systems, it aligns to 64 bytes.

- **place_phys** [optional] - the memory region is mapped into the virtual memory, and it's
  important to note that the virtual address (VA) might not necessarily be the same as the physical
  address (PA). When "place_phys" is set to true, the virtual address corresponds to the physical
  address. If ``place_phys`` equals to true, it allows to specify the physical address of the
  memory region. By default, ``place_phys`` equals to false;

.. note::

>   In MPU systems, place_phys and phys are ignored.

Reviewer: Remove. Already below.

- **phys** [mandatory if ``place_phys`` is true] - it corresponds to the physical address where the
  memory region should be mapped;

.. note::
  For enhanced performance, especially in MMU-based targets, it's recommended to align `base` and
  `size` to the architecture's huge pages (e.g., 2 MiB for Arm and RISC-V). Similarly, if
  `place_phys` is enabled, aligning `phys` to the architecture's huge pages can also improve
  performance.

.. note::

>   In MPU systems, place_phys and phys are ignored.

Reviewer: Merge the two notes into one. Make a list inside the note for both points.

Author: Thanks, fixed!

The usage of `place_phys` and `phys` allows users to manually allocate memory and obtain physical
mappings. This feature provides a means to define the physical memory region explicitly.

3. Inter-Process Communication (IPC)
####################################
.. _Inter-Process Communication (IPC):

Inter-Process Communication (IPC) enables seamless communication between distinct processes in a
computing system. This mechanism facilitates data exchange, synchronization, and coordination,
fostering enhanced functionality and system efficiency.

.. figure:: img/ipc.svg

>     :align: center
>     :name: ipc-fig

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    :align: center
    :width: 100%
    :name: ipc-fig
```

Author: Thanks, fixed!

> Bao provides support for IPC, allowing VMs to establish communication channels. The IPC

Reviewer: To add space below the image and text.
```suggestion
|
```

Author: Thanks, fixed!

Reviewer: You need to use `|` to produce the empty blank lines. Fix it in other images.

- **arch** [mandatory] - allows the definition of architecture dependent configurations and is
  configured through the following structure:

.. code-block:: c

    struct arch_vm_platform {

        // Configuration of the Generic Interrupt Controller (GIC)
        struct vgic_dscrp {
            paddr_t gicd_addr;
            paddr_t gicc_addr;
            paddr_t gicr_addr;
            size_t interrupt_num;
        } gic;

        // Configuration of the System Memory Management Unit (SMMU)
        struct smmu_config{
            streamid_t global_mask;
            size_t group_num;
            struct smmu_group {
                streamid_t mask;
                streamid_t id;
            } *groups;
        } smmu;
    };

where:

- **vgic_dscrp** [mandatory] - corresponds to the configuration of the Generic Interrupt Controller
  (GIC);
- **smmu_config** [optional] - corresponds to the configuration of the System Memory Management
  Unit (SMMU);

CPU Affinity
************

The configuration file of the Bao hypervisor also enables the definition of core affinity, which
involves selecting the physical core where the guest should run.

.. figure:: img/cpu-affinity.svg

>     :align: center
>     :name: cpu-affinity-fig

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    :align: center
    :width: 100%
    :name: cpu-affinity-fig
```

Author: Thanks, fixed!

> This functionality is achieved through the following configuration parameter:

Reviewer: Add an empty line between image and text.

Author: Added, thanks!

- **cpu_affinity** [optional] - corresponds to a bitmap signaling the preferred physical CPUs
  assigned to the VM. If this value is mutually exclusive for all the VMs, the physical CPUs
  assigned to each VM follow the bitmap. Otherwise (in case of bit overlap or lack of affinity
  definition), the CPU assignment is defined by the hypervisor;

Coloring
********

Cache coloring is a technique used to partition shared Last Level Cache (LLC) sets among different
guests (i.e., VMs). The main goal is to minimize cache conflicts and enhance overall system
performance by carefully assigning specific colors, representing cache sets, to different entities.
Bao supports cache coloring which can be configured using the``colors`` field within the
``vm_config`` struct.

- **colors** [optional] - corresponds to a bitmap for the assigned cache colors of the VM. This
  value is truncated depending on the number of available colors calculated at run-time, i.e., its
  platform-dependent. By default, the coloring mechanism is not active. For instance, the following
  picture depicts a hypothetical setup with a 50/50 coloring scheme;

.. figure:: img/llc-colors.svg

>     :align: center
>     :name: llc-colors-fig

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    :align: center
    :width: 100%
    :name: llc-colors-fig
```

Author: Thanks, fixed!

> 

Reviewer: add empty line

Author: Fixed!

Reviewer: See comment above.

2. A C string with the guest image's binary file path. It can be either an absolute path or a path
relative to the config source file.

VM Configuration
--------------------

Bao's configuration file allows you to partition the platforms' hardware resources, such as CPU
cores, memory, or devices, by assigning them to one or more VMs. It also allows you to configure
the guest image to run on that VM. In Bao, resources are exclusively assigned to each VM, including
communication channels between two or more VMs, which may utilize shared memory or dedicated links.

.. figure:: img/guest-config.svg
    :align: center
    :name: guest-config-fig

|

Each entry in the ``vmlist`` mentioned earlier is a ``vm_config`` struct, which defines the
configuration of each individual guest:

.. code-block:: c

    struct vm_config {

>         struct vm_image image;

Reviewer 2: This is slightly different now:

struct {
        vaddr_t base_addr;
        paddr_t load_addr;
        size_t size;
        bool separately_loaded;
        bool inplace;
    } image;

There's no struct type for vm_image

Author: Thanks! Fixed in https://github.com/bao-project/bao-docs/pull/78/commits/8a6069e2433f9c4946b4b5b41c74bb117b1f01fa!

   size.

2. ``VM_IMAGE_LOADED`` - This macro requires additional configurations. It requires the definition
   of image ``base_addr``, the image ``load_addr``, and the image ``size``.

Using these macros not only streamlines the configuration steps but also ensures adherence to the
correct syntax and parameters. Attempting to manually configure image details without utilizing
these macros may result in errors or unintended behavior.

The integration of the appropriate macro, tailored to your specific use case, is crucial for
ensuring consistency and reliability in your VM setup. This macro should encompass essential
parameters such as ``img_name``, ``base_addr``, ``load_addr``, and size. For instance:

- ``IMAGE_BUILTIN``: Simplifies system configuration by leveraging Bao's default knowledge of the
  image location. No separate configuration or loading of guest images through a bootloader is
  required, and adjustments to the size of guest images are unnecessary.

- ``IMAGE_LOADED``: Highly recommended, especially for MPU systems, where manual allocation of
  space for the guest image can be challenging if embedded in Bao's binary. Without utilizing

>   LOADED, Bao may need to copy the image, potentially resulting in space wastage.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  LOADED, Bao may need to copy the image, potentially resulting in wasted space.
```

Author: Fixed in [commit2](https://github.com/bao-project/bao-docs/pull/78/commits/00a28ffd02c8edeac156fa2d0859626846edc820)!

Moreover, if the ``separately_loaded`` parameter is configured as false, the hypervisor interprets
this setting as the offset of the built-in guest image within its own image, denoted as
``VM_IMAGE_OFFSET``. During run-time, the hypervisor adjusts this value to be subsequently
interpreted as a physical address. This adjustment involves adding the address at which the
hypervisor itself was loaded. However, if the ``separately_loaded`` parameter is configured as
true, the guest image is not embedded in the hypervisor image; instead, it is loaded independently.
For more details, refer to the figure below.

.. figure:: img/guest-image.svg
    :align: center
    :width: 100%
    :name: vm-image-fig

> |

Reviewer 2: Good job with the figure!

Author: Thanks!

        struct ipc* ipcs;
        size_t dev_num;
        struct vm_dev_region* devs;
        bool mmu;
        struct arch_vm_platform arch;
    }

By customizing this configuration, users can tailor the virtual platform to suit specific workload
requirements and application needs for their virtual machines. The configuration includes the
definition of:

- ``Number of CPUs`` - see details in `Number of vCPUs`_;
- ``Memory regions`` - see details in `Memory Regions`_;`
- ``Inter-Process Comunication (IPC)`` - see details in `Inter-Process Communication (IPC)`_;
- ``Devices`` - see details in `Devices`_;
- ``Architectural-Specific Configurations`` - see details in `Architectural-Specific
  Configurations`_;

1. Number of vCPUs
##################
.. _Number of vCPUs:

- ``cpu_num`` [mandatory] - defines the number of CPUs assigned to the VM;

.. warning::
  Ensure that the cumulative count of CPUs allocated across all VMs listed in the ``vmlist`` does not
  exceed the total number of available CPUs on the platform. Failing to adhere to this requirement
  might result in the guest failing to boot without any warning.

2. Memory Regions
#################
.. _Memory Regions:

> Bao employs a two-stage translation mechanism to manage VM memory. Each VM memory region is

Reviewer 2: Not true for mpu though

Reviewer 2: I'd remove the first paragraph

Author: You're right, removed in https://github.com/bao-project/bao-docs/pull/78/commits/69735d900ae91470b9b688cd750092215ff595f4!

  important to note that the virtual address (VA) might not necessarily be the same as the physical
  address (PA). When "place_phys" is set to true, the virtual address corresponds to the physical
  address. If ``place_phys`` equals to true, it allows to specify the physical address of the
  memory region. By default, ``place_phys`` equals to false;

- ``phys`` [mandatory if ``place_phys`` is true] - it corresponds to the physical address where the
  memory region should be mapped;

.. note::
    - For enhanced performance, especially in MMU-based targets, it's recommended to align ``base``
      and ``size`` to the architecture's huge pages (e.g., 2MiB for Arm and RISC-V). Similarly, if
      ``place_phys`` is enabled, aligning ``phys`` to the architecture's huge pages can also
      improve performance.
    - In MPU systems, place_phys and phys are ignored.

The usage of ``place_phys`` and ``phys`` allows users to manually allocate memory and obtain
physical mappings. This feature provides a means to define the physical memory region explicitly.

3. Inter-Process Communication (IPC)
####################################

> .. _Inter-Process Communication (IPC):

Reviewer 2: Should be inter-partition communication

Author: Fully agree, fixed in [commit4](https://github.com/bao-project/bao-docs/pull/78/commits/e564d6e6f90ab61d7657c4118f1b55f674690370).

Inter-Process Communication (IPC) enables seamless communication between distinct processes in a
computing system. This mechanism facilitates data exchange, synchronization, and coordination,

> fostering enhanced functionality and system efficiency.

Reviewer 2: I'm okay with leaving as is, but I don't like that it reads as straight chatGPT output

Author: I agree with the point, so I rewrote this part to make it simpler (https://github.com/bao-project/bao-docs/pull/78/commits/696ae378ab4327d6c353941cfb76d0c8d5c05d10). What are your thoughts on this approach?

Reviewer 2: It's ok for me

.. figure:: img/ipc.svg
    :align: center
    :width: 100%
    :name: ipc-fig

|

Bao provides support for IPC, allowing VMs to establish communication channels. The IPC
configuration involves defining the number of IPCs using the ``ipc_num`` field within the

> ``vm_config`` struct. The specifics of each IPC are then outlined through the ``ipcs`` structure,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
``vm_platform`` struct. The specifics of each IPC are then outlined through the ``ipcs`` structure,
```

Author: Thanks! Fixed in [commit6](https://github.com/bao-project/bao-docs/pull/78/commits/a83bb96520b8955efd336b16238d573fb23e92fb).

including fields such as ``base``, ``size``, ``shmem_id``, ``interrupt_num``, and ``interrupts``.

- ``ipc_num`` [optional] - defines the number of IPCs assigned to the VM. By default, ``ipc_num``
  equals to zero;
- ``ipcs`` [mandatory if ``ipc_num`` > 0] - corresponds to the specification of the IPC and is
  configured through the following structure:

.. code-block:: c

    struct ipc {
        paddr_t base;
        size_t size;
        size_t shmem_id;
        size_t interrupt_num;
        irqid_t *interrupts;
    };

where:

> - ``base``  [mandatory] - corresponds to the virtual base address of the IPC memory region;

Reviewer 2: This is a general comment:
To make thinks clearer we should use terms like `guest physical address`, or `guest address`
Here I suggest replacing `virtual address` with `guest address`, and be consistent across the document
thoughts @danielRep @josecm ?

Reviewer: I tend to agree with this.

Author: Agree, fixed in https://github.com/bao-project/bao-docs/pull/78/commits/831e0663c86cd0e53ff5411f8c67aa12de02777e.

  MPU systems, the ``base`` field is ignored, as the region address is the same as the shared
  memory object address. Also, it is mandatory for both ``base`` and ``size`` to be aligned with
  the architecture's smallest page size. For MMU systems, this corresponds to 4K in all
  architectures, while for MPU systems, the alignment corresponds to 64 bytes.

- ``shmem_id`` [mandatory] - corresponds to the ID of the shared memory associated with the IPC;
- ``interrupt_num`` [mandatory] - defines the number of interrupts assigned to the IPC;
- ``interrupts`` [mandatory if *interrupt_num* > 0] - defines a list of interrupt IDs assigned to
  the IPC - ``(irqid_t[]) {irq_1, ..., irq_n}``;

.. warning::
  Specifying a number of interrupts in the ``interrupts`` buffer that differs from the
  ``interrupt_num`` may result in unforeseen behavior.

4. Devices
##########
.. _Devices:

- ``dev_num`` [mandatory] - corresponds to the number of devices assigned to the VM;
- ``devs`` [mandatory if *dev_num* > 0] - corresponds to the specification of the VM's devices and
  is configured through the following structure:

.. code-block:: c

    struct vm_dev_region {
        paddr_t pa;

>         vaddr_t va;

Reviewer 2: Currently device configuration is awkward for MPU configuration as there is no va

I suggest to state this clearly

We should work on this at some point

Author: Thanks! Tried to address this point by updating the note in https://github.com/bao-project/bao-docs/pull/78/commits/3558ec91451e0f20fb210ad2178de2abc561258f, but I'm not sure if it fully addresses this point.

guests (i.e., VMs). The main goal is to minimize cache conflicts and enhance overall system
performance by carefully assigning specific colors, representing cache sets, to different entities.
Bao supports cache coloring which can be configured using the ``colors`` field within the
``vm_config`` struct.

- ``colors`` [optional] - corresponds to a bitmap for the assigned cache colors of the VM. This
  value is truncated depending on the number of available colors calculated at run-time, i.e., its
  platform-dependent. By default, the coloring mechanism is not active. For instance, the following
  picture depicts a hypothetical setup with a 50/50 coloring scheme;

.. figure:: img/llc-colors.svg
    :align: center
    :width: 100%
    :name: llc-colors-fig

|

It's important to note that cache coloring relies on the careful assignment of colors to each VM.
However, this mechanism may not take effect if the physical mapping feature is enabled for a
specific memory region. Cache coloring exclusively operates in virtual memory systems, i.e.,
systems featuring Memory Management Units (MMUs) for address translation.

Shared Memory Configuration

> ---------------------------

Reviewer 2: Remove this here

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/bao-project/bao-docs/pull/78/commits/d2efdcf6c8ba853a19100408e1b1620feef7fa85!

        struct vm_platform platform;
    };

Each entry in this list represents a unique VM configuration, defining its image, memory address,
CPU affinity, color mapping, and platform details. For each VM, the following parameters must be
specified:

- ``image`` [mandatory] - a structure containing information about guest image loading (see details
  in `Guest Image`_)
- ``entry`` [mandatory] - defines the entry point address in guest's address space;
- ``platform description`` [mandatory] - a description of the VM platform, defining its resource
  assignments and requirements (see details in `Virtual Machine Configuration`_);
- ``cpu_affinity`` [optional] - defines the affinity of the VM's vCPUs to the physical CPUs
  assigned to the virtual platform. The affinity will be followed as best as possible, but it is
  not guaranteed (see details in `CPU Affinity`_).;
- ``colors`` [optional] - assignment of shared LLC cache colors (or partitions) to this VM (see
  details in `Coloring`_).

Guest Image
***********
.. _Guest Image:

The guest ``image`` comprises a structure that describes the image configuration running on the
guest side. It encompasses the following options:

> - **image** [mandatory] - definition of the ``image`` to run on a given VM. The ``image``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- ``image`` [mandatory] - definition of the ``image`` to run on a given VM. The ``image``
```

Author: Thanks! Fixed in https://github.com/bao-project/bao-docs/pull/78/commits/12a303c36d4dc3d6310e65291c125de5729336a5!

hypervisor itself was loaded. However, if the ``separately_loaded`` parameter is configured as
true, the guest image is not embedded in the hypervisor image; instead, it is loaded independently.
For more details, refer to the figure below.

.. figure:: img/guest-image.svg
    :align: center
    :width: 100%
    :name: vm-image-fig

|

Virtual Machine Configuration
*****************************

The VM configuration enables users to define the characteristics of each virtualized platform. It
capabilities. The virtual machine configuration is performed by populating the structure ``struct
vm_platform``, outlined below:

.. code-block:: c

    struct vm_platform {
        size_t cpu_num;
        size_t region_num;
        struct vm_mem_region* regions;
        size_t ipc_num;
        struct ipc* ipcs;
        size_t dev_num;
        struct vm_dev_region* devs;
        bool mmu;
        struct arch_vm_platform arch;
    }

By customizing this configuration, users can tailor the virtual platform to suit specific workload
requirements and application needs for their virtual machines. The configuration includes the
definition of:

> - ``Number of CPUs`` - see details in `Number of vCPUs`_;
> - ``Memory regions`` - see details in `Memory Regions`_;`
> - ``Inter-Partition Comunication (IPC)`` - see details in `Inter-Partition Communication (IPC)`_;
> - ``Devices`` - see details in `Devices`_;
> - ``Architectural-Specific Configurations`` - see details in `Architectural-Specific

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Number of CPUs** - see details in `Number of vCPUs`_;
- **Memory regions** - see details in `Memory Regions`_;
- **Inter-Partition Comunication (IPC)** - see details in `Inter-Partition Communication (IPC)`_;
- **Devices** - see details in `Devices`_;
- **Architectural-Specific Configurations** - see details in `Architectural-Specific
```

Author: Thanks! Fixed in https://github.com/bao-project/bao-docs/pull/78/commits/9ffd91e472802b0f7d18b6ea36be3344f52e904f!

.. note::
  The ``size`` field must be less than or equal to the size of the shared memory. Additionally, for
  MPU systems, the ``base`` field is ignored, as the region address is the same as the shared
  memory object address. Also, it is mandatory for both ``base`` and ``size`` to be aligned with
  the architecture's smallest page size. For MMU systems, this corresponds to 4K in all
  architectures, while for MPU systems, the alignment corresponds to 64 bytes.

- ``shmem_id`` [mandatory] - corresponds to the ID of the shared memory associated with the IPC;
- ``interrupt_num`` [mandatory] - defines the number of interrupts assigned to the IPC;
- ``interrupts`` [mandatory if *interrupt_num* > 0] - defines a list of interrupt IDs assigned to
  the IPC - ``(irqid_t[]) {irq_1, ..., irq_n}``;

.. warning::
  Specifying a number of interrupts in the ``interrupts`` buffer that differs from the
  ``interrupt_num`` may result in unforeseen behavior.

4. Devices
##########
.. _Devices:

- ``dev_num`` [mandatory] - corresponds to the number of devices assigned to the VM;
- ``devs`` [mandatory if *dev_num* > 0] - corresponds to the specification of the VM's devices and

>   is configured through the following structure:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- ``devs`` [mandatory if ``dev_num`` > 0] - corresponds to the specification of the VM's devices and
```

Author: Thanks! Fixed in https://github.com/bao-project/bao-docs/pull/78/commits/b7787266d1b74ec1e430a6d98ad1429d0b1e16aa!

.. code-block:: c

    struct vm_dev_region {
        paddr_t pa;
        vaddr_t va;
        size_t size;
        size_t interrupt_num;
        irqid_t *interrupts;
        streamid_t id; /* bus master id for iommu effects */
    };

where:

- ``pa`` [mandatory] - corresponds to the base ``physical address`` of the device;
- ``va`` [mandatory] - corresponds to the base guest ``physical address`` of the device;
- ``size`` [mandatory] - corresponds to the size of the device memory region;

> .. note::

Reviewer 2: Add a second note that we shouldn't add the gic to these devices.
A scenario would be where we want to give a large portion of the MMIO, and that MMIO range contains the GIC. In this case we need to split the MMIO range in two creating a hole for the gic.

Author: Thank you for the review @DavidMCerdeira! Addressed this point in [this commit](https://github.com/bao-project/bao-docs/pull/78/commits/0c360b5e516e0cb6233d261d7a7877bcb5ec1676)

performance by carefully assigning specific colors, representing cache sets, to different entities.
Bao supports cache coloring which can be configured using the ``colors`` field within the
``vm_config`` struct.

- ``colors`` [optional] - corresponds to a bitmap for the assigned cache colors of the VM. This
  value is truncated depending on the number of available colors calculated at run-time, i.e., its
  platform-dependent. By default, the coloring mechanism is not active. For instance, the following
  picture depicts a hypothetical setup with a 50/50 coloring scheme;

.. figure:: img/llc-colors.svg
    :align: center
    :width: 100%
    :name: llc-colors-fig

|

It's important to note that cache coloring relies on the careful assignment of colors to each VM.
However, this mechanism may not take effect if the physical mapping feature is enabled for a
specific memory region. Cache coloring exclusively operates in virtual memory systems, i.e.,
systems featuring Memory Management Units (MMUs) for address translation.

Shared Memory Configuration
---------------------------
.. _Shared Memory Configuration:

> In Bao's configuration multiple (``shmem0``, ``shmem1``, ...) or no shared memory can be set. An ID

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In Bao's configuration, you can set multiple shared memory regions (e.g., shmem0, shmem1) or none at all.
```

Author: Thanks, fixed in commit https://github.com/bao-project/bao-docs/pull/78/commits/3f2a6f174933062acb335c27d1a70adca084d5bc!

...) or none at all. An ID is assigned to each shared memory object. Later, this ID can be linked
to an IPC in the multi-guest configuration.

.. figure:: img/shmem.svg
    :align: center
    :name: shmem-fig

|

The configuration of shared memory is done by populating a struct called ``shmem``. The struct
definition is presented bellow:

.. code-block:: c

    struct shmem {
        size_t size;
        bool place_phys;
        union {
            paddr_t base;
            paddr_t phys;
        };
    };

This struct contains the following parameters:

> - **size** [mandatory] - defines the total size of the shared memory. The size of the shared \
>   memory must always be multiples of 4Kb (0x1000);
> - **place_phys** [optional] - This flag determines the mapping of shared memory into virtual \
>   memory. When ``place_phys`` is set to ``false`` (default value), the base address is a guest \
>   (virtual) address. When set to ``true``, the guest address directly corresponds to the physical \
>   address (PA) of the shared memory.
> - **base / phys** [optional] - When ``place_phys`` is set to ``false``, the ``base`` parameter \

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- ``size`` [mandatory] - defines the total size of the shared memory. The size of the shared \
  memory must always be multiples of 4Kb (0x1000);
- ``place_phys`` [optional] - This flag determines the mapping of shared memory into virtual \
  memory. When ``place_phys`` is set to ``false`` (default value), the base address is a guest \
  (virtual) address. When set to ``true``, the guest address directly corresponds to the physical \
  address (PA) of the shared memory.
- ``base`` / ``phys`` [optional] - When ``place_phys`` is set to ``false``, the ``base`` parameter \
```

Author: Thanks! Fixed in https://github.com/bao-project/bao-docs/pull/78/commits/9744a25a97ea9dbb532bb1011ae33889d826cd17!

> Guests Configuration

Author: Thanks, fixed in c4e19ed96a14cf7fe0af614d016e1dec60a51fb3.

--------------------

Within this configuration file, it is possible to define various aspects of your virtual
environment, including hardware resources, devices, and storage options. One of the most important
features of the configuration file is the ability to define VMs, or guests (VM 1, VM 2, ... VM N).
This allows to create and manage multiple VMs, each with its own operating system and hardware

> resources.

Author: Thanks, fixed in 93be85f1070b26f5c6757f2f814d989021e213b4.

> resources.

Reviewer 2: Contradaction between "by assigning them to one or more VMs." and "In Bao, resources are exclusively assigned to each VM"

> resources.

Author: Agree! Fixed in 0af22168fee64bff57dd3bd95ee208fe42ea6bba.

.. figure:: img/guest-config.svg
    :align: center
    :name: guest-config-fig

> The configuration of different guests is done by populating a struct called *vmconfig*, as follows:

Author: Thanks, fixed in 923bbca5719fda58025bfc192b7461efa1d1a1c4.

> The configuration of different guests is done by populating a struct called *vmconfig*, as follows:

Author: Thanks, fixed in 923bbca5719fda58025bfc192b7461efa1d1a1c4.

> The configuration of different guests is done by populating a struct called *vmconfig*, as follows:

Reviewer 2: I see the latest update still uses the term guest

> The configuration of different guests is done by populating a struct called *vmconfig*, as follows:

Author: Thanks! Fixed in c7a6d758b17018485011afcf2ae6c825513b7f38

.. code-block:: c

    struct vm_config {

>         struct image;

Author: Thanks, fixed in fadc7a2bb90adc5f6d6fd4eebad36337f2748c39.

        vaddr_t entry;
        cpumap_t cpu_affinity;
        colormap_t colors;
        struct vm_platform platform;
    };

For each VM, the following parameters must be specified:

- **image** [mandatory] - corresponds to the guest image (see details in `Guest Image`_)
- **entry** [mandatory] - defines the entry point address in VM's address space;
- **platform description** [mandatory] - corresponds to the guest platform (see details in `Virtual
  Machine Configuration`_);
- **cpu_affinity** [optional] - corresponds to the selection of physical CPUs assigned to the
  virtual platform (see details in `CPU Affinity`_);

> - **colors** [optional] - enables the cache coloring feature (see details in `Coloring`_).

Author: Thanks! Fixed in 7ab7bf436542d6fd6626211577837d6ecc5452d1.

Guest Image
***********
.. _Guest Image:

The guest ``image`` comprises a structure that describes the image configuration running on the

> guest side. It encompasses the following options:

Author: Agree! Addressed in https://github.com/bao-project/bao-docs/pull/78/commits/e46aa17c7c8adcfc8fe1c2ae55fc9153981868e9 & https://github.com/bao-project/bao-docs/pull/78/commits/521c3399c5f327593e34c6b01440d11d99a51876.

- **image** [mandatory] - definition of the ``image`` to run on a given VM. The ``image``

>   corresponds to the following structure:

Author: While this information may seem redundant, providing context about the image within the vm_config struct can be valuable for readers. Additionally, incorporating a pointer or link to review any necessary information could assist individuals engaging in a non-linear read. For instance, if someone specifically seeks the VM configuration section and bypasses the image definition, having this contextualization might be helpful. Should we remove this and keep it simpler (users still have the table of contents on the Read The Docs page)?

.. code-block:: c

    struct image {
            vaddr_t base_addr;
            paddr_t load_addr;
            size_t size;
            bool separately_loaded;
            bool inplace;

>     };

Author: Thanks, fixed in fadc7a2bb90adc5f6d6fd4eebad36337f2748c39.

where:

- **base_addr** [mandatory] - corresponds to the ``image`` load address in the VM's address space;
- **load_addr** [mandatory] - corresponds to the ``image`` load address in the hypervisor address

>   space. This value can be defined using the macro VM_IMAGE_OFFSET(img_name);

Author: Thanks, fixed in 4b057cd11f289d87d6c70c3ef205118ce1610361.

- **size** [mandatory] - corresponds to the image size. This value can be defined using the macro

>   VM_IMAGE_SIZE(img_name);

Author: Thanks, fixed in dde0f11fddf139eee0aa33223d587b912c60aecd.

- **separately_loaded** [optional] - informs the hypervisor if the VM image is to be loaded
  separately by a bootloader; By default, separately_loaded is set as false;
- **inplace** [optional]- use the image inplace and don’t copy the image. By default, inplace is
  set as false;

.. figure:: img/vm-image.svg
    :align: center
    :name: vm-image-fig

To ease the process of configuring the image running on each VM, the configuration of Bao allows

> the use of two different macros:

Author: Thanks, fixed in 987878a6aa4e515a104be67c7cb9152d3c0fe7d5.

> the use of two different macros:

Reviewer 2: Add a warning or a note box to highlight this better

> the use of two different macros:

Author: Thanks! Fixed in f7e00438422e29f58fd532f4ed3eefc69fc15ce2.

1. **VM_IMAGE_BUILTIN** - This macro simplifies image configuration by requiring only the
   ``img_name`` and the image ``base_addr``. This macro specifies both the base address and image
   size.

2. **VM_IMAGE_LOADED** - This macro requires additional configurations. It requires the definition

>    of image ``base_addr``, the image ``load_addr``, and the image ``size``.

Author: Thanks, addressed in dd49512744034522cd1abd99b0207ef2c5b862bf.

Virtual Machine Configuration
*****************************

> The VM configuration enables users to define the characteristics of each the virtualized platform.

Author: Thanks, fixed in 27f6cb74ebdae864bb7417b908a9de0f35853215.

It encompasses critical details that define the VM's run-time environment, performance, and overall
capabilities. By customizing this configuration, users can tailor the virtual platform to suit
specific workload requirements and application needs for their virtual machines. The configuration
encompasses the definition of:

- **Number of virtual CPUs** - see details in `Number of vCPUs`_;

> - **Virtual memory regions** - see details in `Memory Mapping`_;`

Author: Thanks, fixed in 50d0eec13ce3fa0bf1c39a368e078985a0135d19.

- **Inter-Process Comunication (IPC)** - see details in `Inter-Process Communication (IPC)`_;
- **Devices** - see details in `Devices`_;
- **Memory Management** - see details in `Memory Management`_;

> - **Architectural-Specific Configurations** - see details in `Architectural-Specific

Author: Fully agree, refactored this in 3fec42951b45f15f0dad7da83f26a5fc75f07994.

  Configurations`_;

1. Number of vCPUs
##################
.. _Number of vCPUs:

- **cpu_num** [mandatory] - defines the number of CPUs assigned to the VM;

> 

Author: Good point, fixed in a0259bc0ac7777e5bd1c04970f47d6ef1a52a9f2.

> 2. Memory Mapping

Author: Thanks, fixed in b3489c1663dcc54035af65c2b1aba0165b852434.

#################

> .. _Memory Mapping:

Author: Agree, addressed in 1b77d8a1ea233e229e576cb103ea2fc5e3cbd45a.

> .. _Memory Mapping:

Reviewer 2: The document still misses a definition of guest address vs physical address

> .. _Memory Mapping:

Author: Agree! Added in 2aa913b901de0b0d8d55c073a2a10e24ace91ba8.

- **region_num** [mandatory] - defines the number of memory regions mapped to the VM. This

>   structure contemplates the following parameters:

Author: Thanks, fixed in f8011d97198f8b3d9f6a4683c582bd316dd9e5c1.

.. code-block:: c

    struct vm_mem_region {
        paddr_t base;
        size_t size;
        bool place_phys;
        paddr_t phys;
    };

where:

- **base** [mandatory] - corresponds to the base virtual address of the memory region;
- **size**  [mandatory] -  corresponds to the size of the memory region;
- **place_phys** [optional] - the memory region is mapped into the virtual memory, and it's
  important to note that the virtual address (VA) might not necessarily be the same as the physical
  address (PA). When "place_phys" is set to true, the virtual address corresponds to the physical
  address. If ``place_phys`` equals to true, it allows to specify the physical address of the
  memory region. By default, ``place_phys`` equals to false;
- **phys** [mandatory if ``place_phys`` is true] - it corresponds to the physical address where the
  memory region should be mapped;

> 

Author: Good points, thank you! Added in c5923099c8b4ab784b4bad4c305a0668063606e3 and in 9e61aa497068aead1e3aa1c1f492a34c39f0c275.

3. Inter-Process Communication (IPC)
####################################

> .. _Inter-Process Communication (IPC):

Author: Agree, included new content in 854fe14d5edc08d3e958ff0fa3f458baa11507d1.

- **ipc_num** [optional] - defines the number of IPCs assigned to the VM. By default, ``ipc_num``
  equals to zero;
- **ipcs** [mandatory if ``ipc_num`` > 0] - corresponds to the specification of the IPC and is
  configured through the following structure:

.. code-block:: c

    struct ipc {
        paddr_t base;
        size_t size;
        size_t shmem_id;
        size_t interrupt_num;
        irqid_t *interrupts;
    };

where:

- **base**  [mandatory] - corresponds to the virtual base address of the IPC memory region;

> - **size** [mandatory] - corresponds to the size of the IPC memory region;

Reviewer 3: Also, for MPU systems, base is ignored (the region address is the shared memory object address)

> - **size** [mandatory] - corresponds to the size of the IPC memory region;

Author: Thanls, fixed in 404de5a52494eed38516059edb32e4e7031331a3.

> - **size** [mandatory] - corresponds to the size of the IPC memory region;

Author: thanks, addressed in 404de5a52494eed38516059edb32e4e7031331a3.

- **shmem_id** [mandatory] - corresponds to the ID of the shared memory associated with the IPC;
- **interrupt_num** [mandatory] - defines the number of interrupts assigned to the IPC;
- **interrupts** [mandatory if *interrupt_num* > 0] - defines a list of interrupt IDs assigned to
  the IPC - ``(irqid_t[]) {irq_1, ..., irq_n}``;

.. warning::
  Specifying a number of interrupts in the ``interrupts`` buffer that differs from the
  ``interrupt_num`` may result in unforeseen behavior.

4. Devices
##########
.. _Devices:

- **dev_num** [mandatory] - corresponds to the number of devices assigned to the VM;
- **devs** [mandatory if *dev_num* > 0] - corresponds to the specification of the VM's devices and
  is configured through the following structure:

.. code-block:: c

    struct vm_dev_region {
        paddr_t pa;
        vaddr_t va;
        size_t size;
        size_t interrupt_num;
        irqid_t *interrupts;
        streamid_t id; /* bus master id for iommu effects */
    };

where:

- **pa** [mandatory] - corresponds to the base physical address of the device;
- **va** [mandatory] - corresponds to the base virtual address of the device;

> - **size** [mandatory] - corresponds to the size of the device memory region;

Author: Thanks, addressed in ae5a5bdb1904aeea420d94356fc72ceb0cc801f3.

- **interrupt_num** [optional] - corresponds to the number of interrupts generated by the device to
  the VM. By default, ``interrupt_num`` equals to 0;
- **interrupts** [mandatory if *interrupt_num*>0] - defines a list of interrupt IDs generated by
  the device - ``(irqid_t[]) {irq_1, ..., irq_n};``

> - **id** [optional] - corresponds to the bus master id for iommu effects:

Author: Thanks! Addressed in https://github.com/bao-project/bao-docs/pull/78/commits/373c222729f9776e64484936fe5da0e1491527ca

.. warning::
  Specifying a number of interrupts in the ``interrupts`` buffer that differs from the
  ``interrupt_num`` may result in unforeseen behavior.

5. Memory Management
####################
.. _Memory Management:

 **mmu** [optional] - In MPU-based platforms which might also support virtual memory (i.e. aarch64
 cortex-r) the hypervisor sets up the VM using an MPU by default. If the user wants this VM to use
 the MMU they must set the config ``mmu`` parameter to true;

> 6. Architectural-Specific Configurations

Author: Removed old section 5 and split the old section 6 (currently in section 5) in the two architectures (arm and risc-v). However, I saw this information was already on the porting guide, so I mirrored the information here.

########################################
.. _Architectural-Specific Configurations:

- **arch** [mandatory] - allows the definition of architecture dependent configurations and is
  configured through the following structure:

.. code-block:: c

    struct arch_vm_platform {

        // Configuration of the Generic Interrupt Controller (GIC)
        struct vgic_dscrp {
            paddr_t gicd_addr;
            paddr_t gicc_addr;
            paddr_t gicr_addr;
            size_t interrupt_num;
        } gic;

        // Configuration of the System Memory Management Unit (SMMU)

>         struct {

Author: Thanks, fixed in e9e1c43697985f49f1c3c7b0400b42b10e280401.

            streamid_t global_mask;
            size_t group_num;
            struct smmu_group {
                streamid_t mask;
                streamid_t id;
            } *groups;
        } smmu;
    };

where:

- **vgic_dscrp** [mandatory] - corresponds to the configuration of the Generic Interrupt Controller
  (GIC);

> - **vgic_dscrp** [optional] - corresponds to the configuration of the System Memory Management Unit

Author: Thanks, fixed in 431be7fe3361d849639a1aa0ccacdae07fc7eb24.

  (SMMU);

CPU Affinity
************

The configuration file of the Bao hypervisor also enables the definition of core affinity, which
involves selecting the physical core where the guest should run.

.. figure:: img/cpu-affinity.svg
    :align: center
    :name: cpu-affinity-fig

This functionality is achieved through the following configuration parameter:

- **cpu_affinity** [optional] - corresponds to a bitmap signaling the preferred physical CPUs
  assigned to the VM. If this value is mutually exclusive for all the VMs, the physical CPUs
  assigned to each VM follow the bitmap. Otherwise (in case of bit overlap or lack of affinity

>   definition), the CPU assignment is defined by the hypervisor;

Reviewer 3: the cpu affinity will be as best as possible be followed, but it is not guaranteed.

Author: Thanks, added this information!

Coloring

> ********

Author: Thanks, addressed in 2bbd78f5573c827b7df785a6c983c26983be633c.

- ``size`` [mandatory] - corresponds to the size of the device memory region;

.. note::
  It is mandatory for ``base`` and ``size`` to align with the smallest page size of the
  architecture. For MMU systems, this typically aligns to 4K, while for MPU systems, it aligns to

>   64 bytes. Please note that for MPU systems there is no virtual address (VA).

Reviewer 2: Currently, the VA address must be set anyway for MPU systems

Author: Thanks for clarifying, updated in https://github.com/bao-project/bao-docs/pull/78/commits/a139c992247e67ff35c787efe7afd279a15a7ff7!

    - ``iommu.fq_irq_id`` [mandatory if IOMMU is available] - the Fault Queue interrupt ID (the
      current implementation assumes this is a wired interrupt);

.. note::

   When mapping MMIO regions for guests, the memory regions associated with the GIC (Generic
   Interrupt Controller) must be excluded. Mapping these regions can lead to conflicts or incorrect

>    behavior, as they are typically managed by Bao through trap-and-emulate mechanisms.

Reviewer 2: When mapping MMIO regions for guests, the memory regions associated with the interrupt controller (only interrupt controllers are target of MMIO trap and emulate in Bao) must be excluded. Mapping these regions can lead to conflicts or incorrect
   behavior, as they are typically managed by Bao through trap-and-emulate mechanisms.

Author: Thank you @DavidMCerdeira, updated in commit https://github.com/bao-project/bao-docs/pull/78/commits/7cc5013e494154afea5728bfca456de3de34749b.

specific memory region. Cache coloring exclusively operates in virtual memory systems, i.e.,
systems featuring Memory Management Units (MMUs) for address translation.

Shared Memory Configuration
---------------------------
.. _Shared Memory Configuration:

> In Bao's configuration multiple (``shmem0``, ``shmem1``, ...) or no shared memory can be set. If
> at least one shared memory is defined, an  ID is assigned to which the shared memory is
> associated. Later, this ID can be associated with an IPC in the multi-guest configuration.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In Bao's configuration multiple (``shmem0``, ``shmem1``, ...) or no shared memory can be set. An  ID is assigned to each shared memory object. Later, this ID can be linked to an IPC in the multi-guest configuration.
```

Author: Thanks! Fixed  in commit https://github.com/bao-project/bao-docs/pull/78/commits/33652e5f3d7a0867ce9cda4be518f5496cf1078b.

.. figure:: img/shmem.svg
    :align: center
    :name: shmem-fig

|

> The configuration of shared memories is done by populating a struct called
> ``shmem``, as follows:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The configuration of shared memoy is done by populating a struct called
``shmem``. The struct definition is presented bellow:
```

Author: Thanks! Fixed in commit https://github.com/bao-project/bao-docs/pull/78/commits/b4d14d8ed94fcbddc9aa54c21ecef8d0eb53111b.

.. code-block:: c

    struct shmem {
        size_t size;
        bool place_phys;
        union {
            paddr_t base;
            paddr_t phys;
        };
    };

This struct contains the following parameters:

- **size** [mandatory] - defines the total size of the shared memory. The size of the shared \
  memory must always be multiples of 4Kb (0x1000);

> - **place_phys** [optional] - shared memory is mapped into the virtual memory and it's \
>   important to note that the virtual address (VA) might not necessarily be the same as the \
>   physical address (PA). When ``place_phys`` is set to true, the virtual address corresponds to \
>   the physical address. By default, ``place_phy`` equals to false;
> - **base / phys** [optional] - defines the physical address (base address) of the shared memory.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **place_phys** [optional] - shared memory is mapped into the virtual memory and it's \
  important to note that the guest address might not necessarily be the same as the \
  physical address (PA). When ``place_phys`` is set to true, the guest address corresponds to \
  the physical address. By default, ``place_phy`` equals to false;
- **base / phys** [optional] - defines the physical address (base address) of the shared memory.
```

Author: Thanks! Fixed in commit https://github.com/bao-project/bao-docs/pull/78/commits/f6b8cded246f578fef61aaf115ffd77e7988f732.

> - **base / phys** [optional] - defines the physical address (base address) of the shared memory.

Reviewer 2: This is not clear. Please clarify that when place_phys is false base address is the guest address, otherwise phys should be used to set the shared memory physical address

Author: Fixed in commit https://github.com/bao-project/bao-docs/pull/78/commits/07452d7d6faf6f7bd6e5205d03c04c05c84938f6 (updated both the ``place_phys``and the ``base / phys`` descriptions.
